Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06070-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Multi-agent dynamic financial portfolio management: a
differential game approach
Davide La Torre1

· Rosario Maggistro2

Received: 20 November 2023 / Accepted: 20 May 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2024

Abstract
In this paper we extend the classical Merton model to the case of several players and we
propose a multi-agent Merton-type portfolio optimization model formulated by means of
differential games. Each player is price-taker and invests on the market in order to maximize
her inter-temporal utility. On the market there are p different assets, p − 1 of them are risky
and their price are generated by a geometric Brownian motion, while one is risk-free. We
discuss the non-cooperative and cooperative case and show the existence of a closed-form
solution when the class of CRRA utility functions is assumed for both infinite and finite
time horizon. We perform a numerical study which illustrates that a cooperative strategy is
preferable to a non-cooperative one as it allows for the adoption of optimal strategies from
both players. Non-cooperation, instead, leads to sub-optimal solutions.
Keywords Differential games · Dynamic games · Dynamic programming · Merton’s
portfolio model · Noncooperative versus cooperative games
JEL Classification G11 · C70

1 Introduction
During the last century the theory of portfolio management has been enriched with several
contributions and developments. The classical portfolio model by Markowitz (1952), in
which a Decision Maker (DM) selects the most efficient portfolio through different possible
combinations of different investment strategies, is the most important in this vein (Aouni et
al., 2014, 2012; Benson, 1985; Ben Abdelaziz et al., 1999; Ben Abdelaziz and Masri, 2005;
Ben Abdelaziz et al., 2020; La Torre and Mendivil, 2018).

B Davide La Torre

davide.latorre@skema.edu
Rosario Maggistro
rosario.maggistro@deams.units.it

1

SKEMA Business School, Universite Cote d’Azur, Sophia Antipolis, France

2

Department of Economics, Business, Mathematics and Statistics “B. de Finetti”, University of Trieste,
Trieste, Italy

123

Annals of Operations Research

The Markowitz model has notable drawbacks, including its limited ability to capture
the uncertainty associated with portfolio decisions and its static formulation that does not
consider the possibility of portfolio rebalancing over the investment horizon.
On one hand, the literature proposes various extended portfolio models to address multiple
and conflicting criteria, as well as the concepts of uncertainty and incomplete information.
In practical applications, verifying the assumptions required to determine a single optimal
solution is often challenging. Specifically, most of the time, it is difficult to explicitly define
the utility function because numerous unpredictable factors can influence decision-makers.
These situations can be represented by incorporating uncertainty or incomplete information
into the utility function (Ben Abdelaziz and Masri, 2005; La Torre and Mendivil, 2018).
On the other hand, several contributions consider dynamic portfolio allocation models,
and among them, the most famous is the one introduced in 1969 by Merton (1969) [see also
(Merton, 1971, 1987)] in his famous article, “Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty:
The Continuous-Time Case". The portfolio model introduced in this article, known later on
as Merton’s model, is a continuous-time problem in which the investor has to decide the
allocation of her wealth between a risky asset (later, the problem has been extended to the
case with multiple risky assets) and a risk-free one with the goal of maximising her intertemporal utility. In the classic model proposed by Merton, some assumptions are introduced
to simplify the model and make it more tractable from a mathematical perspective. The first
hypothesis considers that all the assets among which it is possible to invest are of the limited
liability (the equity holders have the right, not the obligation, to pay off the debt holders and
take over the remaining assets of the firm) type and the stock prices are governed by Geometric
Brownian Motion processes. The second hypothesis assumes a continuously-trading market
with no transaction costs. Finally, the last assumption considers that there is no default risk
for the issuer of the financial assets. In Merton (1969), the optimal allocation problem is
presented in two different possible scenarios: the finite-horizon case with t ∈ [0, T ], and the
infinite-horizon case with t ∈ [0, +∞).
There are several advantages in utilizing a dynamic Merton’s portfolio allocation versus a
static Markowitz approach. A dynamic framework refers to the practice of actively adjusting
the allocation of assets within a portfolio over time based on changing market conditions,
while static portfolio allocation involves maintaining a fixed allocation of assets without
making frequent adjustments. Therefore, a dynamic approach shows adaptability to changing
market conditions and allows investors to respond to evolving market conditions, economic
factors, and financial trends. It also enables them to adjust their portfolios in real time to
capitalize on opportunities and mitigate risks. In contrast, static portfolio allocation maintains a fixed allocation, which may not be optimal in varying market environments. Another
interesting advantage is related to risk management: dynamic portfolio allocation allows
for better risk management by actively responding to market volatility. It enables investors
to reduce exposure to high-risk assets during periods of heightened market turbulence and
increase exposure to less risky assets. This flexibility helps minimize potential losses and preserve capital. A dynamic formulation also has the potential for enhanced returns: by actively
adjusting the portfolio based on market conditions, dynamic portfolio allocation seeks to
identify and seize investment opportunities that can potentially generate higher returns. It
may involve reallocating investments to sectors or asset classes that are expected to outperform in the current market environment. In contrast, static portfolio allocation may limit the
ability to capture such opportunities. Dynamic portfolio allocation can optimize diversification by identifying and adjusting the portfolio’s asset allocation based on the correlations
between different asset classes. It allows for rebalancing the portfolio to maintain an optimal
diversification level, which can help reduce the overall risk and enhance potential returns.

123

Annals of Operations Research

Static portfolio allocation may not adapt to changes in asset correlations, potentially resulting
in suboptimal diversification. Finally, a dynamic portfolio allocation requires active management and monitoring of market conditions. This active approach allows investors to take
advantage of market inefficiencies, emerging trends, and new information. It enables them
to make timely investment decisions and adjust the portfolio to align with their investment
objectives. On the other hand, static portfolio allocation relies on a passive approach without
considering real-time market dynamics.
There are two potential approaches to extending Merton’s model: one involves utilizing
dynamic multiobjective optimization techniques, while the other involves applying a dynamic
game framework.
Dynamic multiobjective models in portfolio management use optimization techniques
to generate a dynamic set of Pareto-optimal portfolios. These portfolios represent different
combinations of asset allocations that achieve the best trade-offs between risk and return,
catering to the preferences of different investors. Therefore, investors can select, at each
instant of time, a portfolio from the dynamic Pareto front based on their risk appetite and
return requirements, effectively making a decision based on their preferences.
In the dynamic game approach, instead, the model focuses on capturing the decisionmaking processes and interactions of individual agents within the market. Each agent makes
investment decisions independently based on their own objectives and market information.
The collective behaviour of these agents influences the overall market dynamics and portfolio
performance. They aim to understand how the behaviour and strategies of individual agents
impact the overall market dynamics in both cooperative and non-cooperative frameworks,
including asset prices, trading volumes, and portfolio performance.
In this paper, we propose an extension of Merton’s model under a dynamic game approach
to the case of several agents but outside the context of the price equilibrium. More in detail,
we consider the case of two players acting on the same financial market and sharing the
possibility of investing their wealth in a fixed and common number of possible risky and
risk-free assets. We first focus on the infinite-horizon formulation, and then we discuss how
to modify our conclusions in the finite-horizon case. In both cases, we determine the optimal
level of consumption and the optimal portfolio allocation across different assets. In fact, under
the hypothesis of considering a Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) utility function, it
is possible to determine the closed-form solution of the Bellman equation and, therefore, the
optimal time-continuous paths.
The paper is organized as follows. Sect. 2 presents a literature review on the several extensions of Merton’s model while Sect. 3 summarizes the classic Merton’s model for an agent in
continuous time. In Sect. 4, we formulate our multi-agent Merton-type model under a dynamic
game approach. Section 5 is dedicated primarily to the analysis of the non-cooperative case
and then of the cooperative one, considering the CRRA utility function as a power function.
The logarithm expression of the CRRA utility is used in Sect. 6, and similar investigations to
the previous section are conducted. Section 7 shows how the previous results would become
in the case of the finite-horizon model. In Sect. 8, we present a case study where we compare
the implementation of non-cooperative versus cooperative strategies for a simple dynamic
portfolio model. Sect. 9 discusses the managerial implications of our model, and Sect. 10
concludes the paper.

123

Annals of Operations Research

2 Literature review
A number of extensions of Merton’s model have incorporated more complex features into
the models, such as bankruptcy [see, e.g., (Karatzas et al., 1986; Sethi and Taksar, 1992)]
or general price processes [e.g., (Karatzas et al., 1987; Karatzas and Žitković, 2003)]. In
Karatzas et al. (1986), the authors determined the single-agent optimal policies and the
value function by using weaker assumptions on the utility function than the ones required
on Merton (1969). Moreover, they removed the restriction U  (0) = ∞ used to guarantee
that, under an optimal policy, the consumption constraint will not be active and bankruptcy
will not occur. Hence, they carefully treated the consumption constraint and addressed the
possibility of bankruptcy. In Karatzas et al. (1987) instead, it was considered a martingalebased approach to the problem in complete Itô process markets. This approach applies to a
much more general class of stock price processes, including non-Markovian models, and was
used to explicitly characterise single-agent optimal policies for general utility functions and
semi-martingale stock price processes. Other works included multiple agents in the model,
such as Karatzas et al. (1990) and Tapiero (2015), but they did so in an equilibrium context;
each agent’s behaviour depends on the others only through the price, which is determined
in equilibrium. In Karatzas et al. (1990), the multi-agent consumption/investment problem
was reduced to the problem of finding an appropriate “representative agent" who represents
the individual interests of the many agents and has their aggregate income. In this setting,
the authors proved the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium prices and characterized
these prices as well as the consumption and investment decisions made by the individual
agents. Tapiero (2015) considers a wealth heterogeneous multi-agent financial Consumption
Capital Assets Pricing Model (CCAPM), where instead of defining a representative agent
underlying the pricing model, assumes that each agent is, in fact, ‘Cournot-gaming’ a market
defined by all other agents. This results in a decomposition of an n-agents game into n
games of two agents: a specific agent and a synthetic one (a proxy for all other agents),
on the basis of which an equilibrium consumption price solution is defined. More recently,
Kogan and Tapiero (2018) proposed the formulation of the multi-agent financial Merton’s
model as a stochastic differential Cournot game, resulting in a unique consumption price as
a function of aggregate demand for consumption and supply factors. More specifically, the
authors defined the “Cournot game” as that of an individual agent “gaming the market” and
pointed out that consumption decisions depend on consumers’ strategic strengths. A mean
field approach to the optimal consumption/investment problem under relative performance
criteria was proposed by Lacker and Soret (2020), where a closed-form solution for the nplayer game and the corresponding mean field game is provided. That solution is unique in
the class of equilibria with constant investment and continuous time-dependent consumption,
both independent of the wealth of the agent. Other extensions can be found, for instance, in
Ben Abdelaziz and La Torre (2021), Chang (2004) and Hamacher et al. (2007).

3 Preliminaries
Merton’s model is an inter-temporal portfolio choice problem. In its classical formulation,
it is defined as a stochastic optimal control model, and it can be solved in a closed-form
solution by means of the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation. Analytical tractability
in Merton’s classical formulation is due to the following conditions: normal distribution of

123

Annals of Operations Research

asset returns, constant relative risk-aversion, continuous trading. Moreover, Merton’s model
formulation is based on the following assumptions:
• current wealth is W0 > 0, and there is an infinite life expectation;
• it is possible to invest in (allocate to) p − 1 risky assets and a risk-free asset;
• each risky asset has known normal distribution of returns;
• it is allowed to long or short any fractional quantities of assets;
• trading is done in continuous time t ≥ 0, with no transaction costs;
• one can consume any fractional amount of wealth at any time;
• decisions are taken in a dynamic framework, and both the share of wealth invested in the
i−th asset si , for every asset i, and the consumption c can be done at each time;
• the decision maker aims at maximizing the lifetime-aggregated utility of consumption;
• consumption utility U : R+ → R is a concave C 2 (twice differentiable with continuous
derivatives) function and is assumed to have constant relative risk-aversion.
Therefore, Merton’s model reads as:

max

c,s1 ,s2 ,...,s p−1

J (W , c, s1 , s2 , . . . , s p−1 ) := E

 +∞

e−ρt U (c(t))dt

(1)

0

Subject to:

⎧
p−1
p−1
⎪
⎪
⎪ d W (t) =
s
(t)(μ
−
μ
)
+
μ
si (t)σi d Bi (t)
W
(t)
−
c(t)
dt
+
W
(t)
⎪
i
i
p
p
⎪
⎪
i=1
i=1
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
W (0) = W0 > 0 given,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ W (t) > 0 ∀ t > 0,
(2)
d Pi (t) = Pi (t)(μi dt + σi d Bi (t)),
Pi (0) > 0 given, i = 1, . . . , p − 1
⎪
⎪
⎪
d
P
(t)
=
μ
P
(t),
P
(0)
>
0
given,
⎪
p
p p
p
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪ p
⎪
si (t) = 1,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ i=1
0 ≤ si (t) ≤ ξi , i = 1, . . . , p
This is as a continuous-time stochastic control problem in which the state at time t is
W (t), the control at the time t is described by si (t) and c(t), the reward per unit of time is
U (c(t)), and the return at the time t is the accumulated discounted reward:
 +∞

e−ρ(s−t) U (c(s))ds,

(3)

t

where ρ > 0 is a discount factor. The price of the i-th risky asset, denoted by Pi (t), i =
1, . . . , p − 1, is modelled by the following stochastic process (geometric Brownian motion):
d Pi (t) = Pi (t)(μi dt + σi d Bi (t)),

i = 1, . . . , p − 1

(4)

where μi is the instantaneous conditional expected rate of Pi per unit time, σi > 0 is the
instantaneous conditional covariance per unit time and d Bi (t) is a Wiener process independent from each others for every i. The p-th asset is purely deterministic (risk-free); therefore,
its price Pp (t) is generated by:
d Pp (t) = μ p (t)Pp (t)dt,

(5)

123

Annals of Operations Research

where μ p stands for the risk-free interest rate. Since si (t) is the share of wealth invested in
the i − th asset, follows that
p

si (t) = 1.

(6)

i=1

The total wealth W (t) is defined to be
p

Ni (t)Pi (t),

W (t) =

(7)

i=1

where Ni (t) are the units of the asset i owned by the investor at time t. Note that, since Ni (t)
can be expressed as Ni (t) = si (t)W (t)/Pi (t), then from (7) follows (6). By differentiating
(7) and considering the expression of Ni (t) (in terms of si (t) and Pi (t)) as well as (4), (5)
and the consumption c, we get the following budget equation [see (Merton, 1969)]:
⎡⎛

⎞

p−1

dW (t) = ⎣⎝

⎤

p−1

si (t)(μi − μ p ) + μ p ⎠ W (t) − c(t)⎦ dt +
i=1

si (t)σi W (t)d Bi (t).
i=1

Finally, we denote by ξi ∈ (0, 1] the weight in terms of volume of the asset i on the total
market volume.
The financial portfolio manager aims to find the optimal investment policy that maximizes
the inter-temporal utility. In order to do this, she will decide the optimal share of wealth to
invest in the i-th asset by taking into account the volatility of each risky asset and the overall
level of consumption.

4 Main result: a multi-agent dynamic portfolio model
The aim of this section is to present our main model formulation. Our goal is to extend the
classical Merton’s model with a single player to the case of two players that invest in the
same financial market and analyze cooperative vs non-cooperative strategies. As described
in the sequel, our analysis confirms that cooperation is the best strategy as, in this scenario,
both players can put in place their optimal investment plans. In this scenario, indeed, the two
decision-makers share their information about financial market risk, and this allows us to
assume that both of them have the same risk aversion parameter. Non-cooperation, instead,
leads to the implementation of sub-optimal strategies. Our formulation takes the form of a
dynamic game in which each of the two players aims to solve the following problem:

j

max
j

j

j

c j ,s1 ,s2 ,...,s p−1

Subject to:

123

j

j

J (W j , c j , s1 , s2 , . . . , s p−1 ) := E

 +∞
0

e−ρt

2

U j (c1 (t), c2 (t))dt
j=1

(8)

Annals of Operations Research

⎧

p−1
p−1
⎪
⎪
j
j
j
⎪
d W (t) =
si (t)(μi − μ p ) + μ p W j (t) − c j (t) dt + W j (t)
si (t)σi d Bi (t)
⎪
⎪
⎪
i=1
i=1
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
W j (0) = W j > 0 given,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
W j (t) > 0 ∀ t ∈ (0, T ],
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ d Pi (t) = Pi (t)(μi dt + σi d Bi (t)),
Pi (0) > 0 given, i = 1, . . . , p − 1
.
(9)
Pp (0) > 0 given,
d Pp (t) = μ p Pp (t)dt,
⎪
⎪
p
⎪
⎪
j
⎪
⎪
si (t) = 1,
j = 1, 2
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪ i=1 2
⎪
⎪
⎪
j
⎪
⎪
si (t) ≤ ξi , i = 1, . . . , p
0≤
⎪
⎩
j=1

Most of the parameters and the equations listed in (8)–(9) can be seen as a natural extension
of those presented in the previous section for a single decision maker. However, the following
considerations hold true:
• Both the two players, j = 1, 2, invest on the financial market and share the same number
of investments. There are p available assets, p − 1 are risky and one is risk-free.
j
• si is the share of wealth of the player j invested in the i-th asset and hence
p
j

si (t) = 1.

(10)

i=1

Moreover, we can establish the following relation:
2
j

0≤

si (t) ≤ ξi ,

(11)

j=1

which states that the sum of the shares of wealth of both players invested in the same
asset i will at most be equal to the availability, in terms of volume, of the asset i on the
total market volume. Note that (10) and (11) imply the following technical condition:
p

ξi ≥ 2,

(12)

i=1
j

because 0 ≤ si (·) ≤ 1 for i = 1, . . . , p, and j = 1, 2. Then, the sum of the upper
bounds has to be greater or equal to 2. Moreover, (11) will take the form of an equality,
i.e.,
2
j

si (t) = ξi ,

(13)

j=1

in the cooperative framework as it represents the external enforcement that allows the
players to cooperate.
• U j : R+ × R+ → R, j = 1, 2, is a concave C 2 utility function with respect to both
variables. Note that each player’s utility function also depends on the consumption of the
other, which is reasonable as the two players operate in the same financial market.
In the next sections, we discuss how to obtain optimal strategies for players in both
cooperative and non-cooperative contexts. We consider both the finite and the infinite time
horizon, and we determine the optimal solution to the HJB equation for power and logarithmic
utilities.

123

Annals of Operations Research

5 The case of power utility
5.1 The non-cooperative case
In a non-cooperative framework, the player 1 (the player 2) solves the problem (8)–(9) by
taking the behaviour of the player 2 (player 1) as given, meaning that each player cares
only about its investments on the market. Hence, for the player 1, solving the problem (8)
is equivalent to solve another maximization problem in which the utility function U1 only
depends on c1 (t), as c2 (t) can be considered to be exogenous and, therefore, it will not affect
the computation of the maximum. Moreover, the player 1 also know the shares of wealth of
the player 2 invested in all assets i, as this data is provided exogenously.
Similar considerations also hold for the player 2. Then, it is possible to show that the
following result for the player 1 holds true. An equivalent result also holds for the player 2
(see Remark 1).
Proposition 1 Let us suppose that:
⎛
1
ρ > (1 − α1 ) ⎝μ p +
2

p−1
i=1

⎞
(μi − μ p )2
⎠
α1 (σi )2

and assume that the utility function takes the form:
U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) =

1
1
(c1 (t))1−α1 +
(c2 (t))1−α2 ,
1 − α1
1 − α2

with constant relative risk aversion α j > 0, α j = 1 for j = 1, 2, and α1 such that 0 ≤ si1 <
ξi − si2 . Then the non-cooperative optimal consumption and investment on the i-th asset of
the player 1, along with her total wealth are respectively given by:
⎡
⎤⎞
⎛
p−1
(μi − μ p )2
ρ
1
−
α
1
1
1
⎣μ p +
⎦⎠ W 1 (t),
c (t) = ⎝ −
(14)
α1
α1
2
α1 (σi )2
i=1

μi − μ p
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1.
(15)
si1 (t) =
α1 (σi )2
⎡⎛
⎤
⎞
p−1
p−1
2
(μ
−
μ
)
−
ρ
μ
−
μ
μ
1
i
p
p
i
p
⎠t +
+
(Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
W 1 (t) = W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝
2
α1 (σi )2
α1
α1 σi
i=1

i=1

(16)
Proof Denoting by V1 ∈ C 2 the value function associated to the problem (8)–(9) for the
player 1, the triple (W 1 (t), c1 (t), si1 (t)) is its solution if V1 (W 1 (t)) solves the following
Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation:
⎡⎛
⎤
⎞

p−1
−ρV1 + max ⎣⎝
si1 (t)(μi − μ p ) + μ p ⎠ W 1 (t) − c1 (t)⎦ DW 1 V1 + U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t))
{c1 ,si1 }

i=1

1
+
2

123

p−1


2
= 0,
(si1 (t))2 (σi )2 (W 1 (t))2 DW
1 V1

i=1

(17)

Annals of Operations Research
2 V
where DW 1 V1 is the first derivative of the value function V1 with respect to W 1 , while DW
1 1
1
2
1
1
1
is its second derivative with respect to W . Denoting by H1 (W , c , si , DW 1 V1 , DW 1 V1 ) the
Hamiltonian associated to (17), and assuming that

U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) =

V1 (W 1 (t)) =

1
1
(c1 (t))1−α1 +
(c2 (t))1−α2 , α j > 0, α j = 1, j = 1, 2,
1 − α1
1 − α2
(18)

1
A−α
1
(W 1 (t))1−α1 , A1 ∈ R, α1 > 0, α1 = 1,
1 − α1

(19)

we apply the first-order conditions as to get:
∂ H1
1
−α1
1
+ (c1 (t))−α1 = 0 ⇐⇒ c1 (t) = A1 W 1 (t),
= −A−α
1 (W (t))
∂c1 (t)
p−1

(20)

p−1

∂ H1
1
1−α1
1
1−α1
1
1
=
(μi − μ p )A−α
+
(si1 (t))(σi )2 A−α
=0
1 (W (t))
1 (−α1 )(W (t))
∂si1 (t)
i=1
i=1
⇐⇒ si1 (t) =

μi − μ p
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
α1 (σi )2

(21)

Note that the condition 0 ≤ si1 < ξi − si2 that follows from (11) in the non-cooperative
framework, is satisfied for every i = 1, . . . , p − 1, if



μ1 − μ p
μ2 − μ p
μ p−1 − μ p
α1 > max
,
,...,
,
(σ1 )2 (ξ1 − s12 ) (σ2 )2 (ξ2 − s22 )
(σ p−1 )2 (ξ p−1 − s 2p−1 )

(22)

with μi − μ p ≥ 0, ∀ i = 1, . . . , p − 1.
By plugging the expressions of (18), (19), (20), (21) into (17) and remembering that the
utility U1 only depends on the c1 (t) term (due the equivalence of the maximization problems
observed at the begin of the section) we get
⎡
⎤
p−1
(μi − μ p )2
ρ
1 − α1 ⎣
1
⎦.
μp +
A1 =
−
α1
α1
2
α1 (σi )2

(23)

i=1

To ensure that V1 is a concave function, it is necessary that A1 > 0 and hence that
⎛
1
ρ > (1 − α1 ) ⎝μ p +
2

p−1
i=1

⎞
(μi − μ p )2
⎠.
α1 (σi )2

Then, by replacing (23) into (20) and using (21) we get the closed-form expressions of the
controls given by (14) and (15). By using (14) and (15) in the first equation of (9), the optimal
wealth of the player 1 follows:

123

Annals of Operations Research

⎡⎛
1
W 1 (t) = W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝
2

p−1
i=1

⎤
⎞
p−1
μp − ρ
(μi − μ p )2
μi − μ p
⎠t +
+
(Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
α1 (σi )2
α1
α1 σi
i=1

(24)
The transversality condition reads as follows:



A−α1 
lim e−ρt E V1 (W 1 (t)) = lim e−ρt · 1 E (W 1 (t))1−α1 = 0,
t→+∞
t→+∞
1 − α1

(25)



1−α1

and
which is verified noting that by Jensen’s inequality E (W 1 (t))1−α1 ≤ E (W 1 (t))

lim e−ρt ·

t→+∞

1

1−α1
A−α
1
E (W 1 (t))
1 − α1
⎛
⎡⎛

1
A−α
1
⎝W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝− ρ + 1
= lim
t→+∞ 1 − α1
1 − α1
2

p−1
i=1

⎞ ⎤⎞1−α1 (26)
μp − ρ
(μi − μ p )2
⎠ t ⎦⎠
+
=0
α1 (σi )2
α1

if and only if
⎛
1
ρ > (1 − α1 ) ⎝μ p +
2

p−1
i=1

⎞
(μi − μ p )2
⎠.
(σi )2

(27)

Therefore, since
0 ≤ e−ρt ·

1

1−α1

A−α
A−α1 
1
E (W 1 (t))1−α1 ≤ e−ρt · 1 E (W 1 (t))
,
1 − α1
1 − α1

by the limit comparison theorem for t → +∞ follows (25).
Remark 1 As anticipated at the beginning of the section, a result equivalent to Proposition
1 holds for player 2. Indeed, proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 1, we get that the
non-cooperative optimal consumption and the investment on the i-th asset together with the
total wealth of the player 2 are given by:
⎡
⎤⎞
⎛
p−1
2
(μ
−
μ
)
ρ
1
−
α
1
i
p
2
⎣μ p +
⎦⎠ W 2 (t),
c2 (t) = ⎝ −
α2
α2
2
α2 (σi )2
i=1

μi − μ p
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
si2 (t) =
α2 (σi )2
⎞
⎡⎛
⎤
p−1
p−1
(μi − μ p )2
μi − μ p
μp − ρ
1
2
2
⎠t +
+
(Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
W (t) = W (0) exp ⎣⎝
2
α2 (σi )2
α2
α2 σi
i=1

i=1

Remark 2 Note that, as will be shown in the numerical study in Sect. 8, in the non-cooperative
case, the use of both optimal strategies by the two players may not be admissible due to the
lack of the necessary volume of assets on the market.

123

Annals of Operations Research

5.2 The cooperative case
Now, we focus on the cooperative setup where the two players agree on the investments to be
made on the market so that both maximize their intertemporal utility. Moreover, they share
the same constant relative risk aversion, i.e., α1 = α2 = α.
Then, the following holds.
Proposition 2 Suppose that

⎡

1
ρ > (1 − α) ⎣μ p +
4

⎤

p−1

ξi (μi − μ p )⎦ ,
i=1

and the utility functions U1 and U2 in (8) take the same form:
U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) = U2 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) =


1  1
(c (t))1−α + (c2 (t))1−α ,
1−α

where α > 0, α = 1 is the common constant relative risk aversion. Then the cooperative
optimal controls for the two players j = 1, 2, along with their total wealth are respectively
given by:
⎛
⎤⎞
⎡
p−1
1
ρ
1
−
α
j
⎣μ p +
c (t) = ⎝ −
ξi (μi − μ p )⎦⎠ W j (t),
(28)
α
α
4
i=1

j

si (t) =

ξi
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
2
⎡⎛

W j (t) = W j (0) exp ⎣⎝

μp − ρ
1
+
α
4

⎞

p−1

ξi (μi − μ p )⎠ t +
i=1

1
2

(29)
⎤

p−1

σi ξi (Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦
i=1

(30)
Proof By defining V ∈ C 2 the value function associated with the problem (8)–(9), the triple
j
(W j (t), c j (t), si (t)) for j = 1, 2 is its solution if V (W 1 (t), W 2 (t)) solves the following
HJB equation:
 2   p−1
− ρV +

max

{c1 ,c2 ,si1 ,si2 }

j=1

1
+ U2 (c (t), c (t)) +
2
1



j
si (t)(μi − μ p ) + μ p W j (t) − c j (t), DW j V + U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t))

i=1
j
2
(si (t))(sik (t))(σi )2 (W j (t))(W k (t))DW
j Wk V

2

j,k=1

(31)



 p−1

2

= 0,

i=1

2
where DW j V is the first derivative of the value function V with respect to W j , while DW
j Wk V
j
k
is its second derivative with respect to W W for j, k = 1, 2.
2 V ) be the Hamiltonian associated to (31), where
Let H (W , c, si , DW V , DW

W = [W 1 , W 2 ], c = [c1 , c2 ], si = [si1 , si2 ],
and


2
V =
DW

DW V = [DW 1 V , DW 2 V ],

2
2
D(W
1 )2 V D W 1 W 2 V
2
2
DW 2 W 1 V D(W
2 )2 V

.

123

Annals of Operations Research

Assuming that

1  1
(c (t))1−α + (c2 (t))1−α , α > 0, α = 1,
1−α
(32)
−α 

A
V (W 1 (t), W 2 (t)) =
(W 1 (t))1−α + (W 2 (t))1−α , A ∈ R, α > 0, α = 1, (33)
1−α

U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) = U2 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) =

we can apply the first order conditions to get the expression of the controls:
∂H
= −A−α (W j (t))−α + 2(c j (t))−α = 0 ⇐⇒ c j (t) = 21/α AW j (t), j = 1, 2
∂c j (t)
(34)
∂H
j

∂si (t)

p−1

p−1

(μi − μ p )A−α (W j (t))1−α +

=
i=1

⇐⇒

(si (t))(σi )2 A−α (−α)(W j (t))1−α = 0
j

i=1

μi − μ p
j
,
si (t) =
α(σi )2

j = 1, 2 , i = 1, . . . , p − 1.

By plugging the expressions of (32), (33), (34) and (35) into (31) follows that
⎡
⎤
p−1
(μi − μ p )2
ρ
1−α ⎣
1
⎦.
A=
μp +
−
α 21/α
α 21/α
2
α(σi )2

(35)

(36)

i=1

Finally, imposing to (36) the constraint (13) that, using (35) can be re-written as
μi − μ p
ξi
= ,
α(σi )2
2
we obtain

i = 1, . . . , p − 1

(37)

⎡
⎤
p−1
1−α ⎣
1
ρ
μp +
−
ξi (μi − μ p )⎦ .
A=
α 21/α
α 21/α
4

(38)

i=1

We require that A (38) be strictly positive to guarantee the concavity of V , and hence that
⎤
⎡
p−1
1
ξi (μi − μ p )⎦ .
(39)
ρ > (1 − α) ⎣μ p +
4
i=1

Then, by replacing (38) into (34) and rewriting (35) using (37), we get (28) and (29). The
optimal wealth of the player j, j = 1, 2, i given by:
⎡⎛
⎞
⎤
p−1
p−1
−
ρ
μ
1
1
p
W j (t) = W j (0) exp ⎣⎝
ξi (μi − μ p )⎠ t +
σi ξi (Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
+
α
4
2
i=1

i=1

(40)
The transversality condition is given by:



A−α   1
E (W (t))1−α + (W 2 (t))1−α = 0,
lim e−ρt E V (W 1 (t), W 2 (t)) = lim e−ρt ·
t→+∞
1−α
(41)

t→+∞

123

Annals of Operations Research

which is satisfied, noting that, by Jensen’s inequality follows

1−α

1−α


E (W 1 (t))1−α + (W 2 (t))1−α ≤ E (W 1 (t))
+ E (W 2 (t))
,
and
1−α

1−α "
A−α !  1
E (W (t))
=
+ E (W 2 (t))
t→+∞
1−α
⎡⎛
⎞ ⎤
1−α
#
p−1
−
ρ
μ
A−α
ρ
1
p
ξi (μi − μ p )⎠ t ⎦
+
lim
W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝−
+
+
t→+∞ 1 − α
1−α
α
4
i=1
⎡⎛
⎞ ⎤

1−α $
p−1
μ
−
ρ
1
ρ
p
2
⎣
⎝
⎠
⎦
W (0) exp
=0
+
+
−
ξi (μi − μ p ) t
1−α
α
4
lim e−ρt ·

i=1

if and only if
⎡
α
ρ > (1 − α) ⎣μ p +
4

⎤

p−1

ξi (μi − μ p )⎦

(42)

i=1

Therefore, since
0 ≤ e−ρt ·


1−α

1−α "
A−α  1
A−α !  1
,
+ E (W 2 (t))
E (W (t))1−α + (W 2 (t))1−α ≤ e−ρt ·
E (W (t))
1−α
1−α

by the limit comparison theorem for t → +∞ follows (41).

6 The case of log utility
In this section, following the same reasoning as in Sect. 5, we first consider the noncooperative case and then the cooperative one. The following result holds for the player
1, which solves (8)–(9) by knowing the behaviour of the player 2.
Proposition 3 If the utility function takes the form
U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) = ln(c1 (t)) + ln(c2 (t)),

(43)

and si1 is such that 0 ≤ si1 < ξi − si2 , then the non-cooperative optimal consumption and
investment of the i−th asset of the player 1, along with her total wealth are respectively given
by
(44)
c1 (t) = ρ W 1 (t),
−
μ
μ
i
p
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
(45)
si1 (t) =
(σi )2
⎡⎛
⎞
⎤
p−1
p−1
2
(μ
−
μ
)
μ
−
μ
1
i
p
i
p
+ μ p − ρ⎠ t +
(Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
W 1 (t) = W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝
2
(σi )2
σi
i=1

i=1

(46)

123

Annals of Operations Research

Proof The proof is very similar to the one of Proposition 1, so we sketch only the different
parts. Denoting again by V1 ∈ C 2 the value function for the player 1 solving (17), we take
the utility function as in (43) and assume
V1 (W 1 (t)) =

ln(W 1 (t))
+ B1 ,
A1

A1 , B1 ∈ R, A1 = 0.

(47)

Note that here there are two coefficients A1 and B1 to be determined. By the first order
conditions we get that si1 (t) = (μi − μ p )/(σi )2 for i = 1, . . . , p − 1, and the consumption
c1 (t) = A1 W 1 (t). Moreover, si1 satisfies by hypothesis the condition 0 ≤ si1 < ξi − si2 . By
substituting c1 (t), si1 (t) and (47) into Eq. (17) we obtain
⎧
⎤⎫
⎡
p−1
⎬
(μi − μ p )2
1⎨
1 ⎣1
⎦ ,
B1 =
+
μ
−
ρ
ln(ρ) +
p
⎭
ρ⎩
ρ 2
(σi )2
i=1

= ρ to get rid of ln(W 1 (t)). Then, by substituting A

after imposing A1
1 = ρ in the expression
of c1 (t), we get (44). By replacing (44) and (45) in the first equation of (9) follows the optimal
wealth of the player 1:
⎡⎛
⎞
⎤
p−1
p−1
2
(μ
−
μ
)
μ
−
μ
1
i
p
i
p
W 1 (t) = W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝
+ μ p − ρ⎠ t +
(Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
2
(σi )2
σi
i=1

i=1

The transversality condition is
#
$

ln(W 1 (t))
e−ρt 
+ B1 = lim
E ln(W 1 (t)) + lim e−ρt B1 = 0. (48)
lim e−ρt E
t→+∞
t→+∞
t→+∞
A1
A1
Note that the value of the second limit on the right-hand side of (48) is zero, so we focus
only on the first limit. Applying Jensen’s inequality, we get




E ln(W 1 (t)) ≤ ln(E W 1 (t) )


and limt→+∞ e−ρt ln(E W 1 (t) ) = 0. Hence, by the limit comparison theorem for t → +∞
follows (48).
A similar result to Proposition 3 also holds for the player 2.
In the cooperative framework, the following holds.
Proposition 4 If the utility function takes the form as in (43), then the cooperative optimal
consumption and investment of the i−th asset of the player j = 1, 2, along with her total
wealth, are respectively given by
c j (t) = ρ W j (t),

(49)

ξi
j
si (t) = , i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
2
⎡⎛
W j (t) = W j (t) = W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝

(50)
1
4

p−1

⎞
ξi (μi − μ p ) + μ p − ρ ⎠ t +

i=1

1
2

⎤

p−1

ξi σi (Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
i=1

(51)
Proof We proceed similarly to Proposition 2 but assuming the utility function as in (43) and
the value function solving (31) as
V (W 1 (t), W 2 (t)) =

123

1 
ln(W 1 (t)) + ln(W 2 (t)) + B,
A

A, B ∈ R, A = 0.

(52)

Annals of Operations Research
j

The first order condition give us si (t) = (μi −μ p )/(σi )2 and c j (t) = 2 AW j (t) for j = 1, 2.
j
By plugging si (t), c j (t) and (52) into (31) we get
⎧
⎤⎫
⎡
p−1
⎬
4⎨
1 ⎣1
B=
ξi (μi − μ p ) + μ p − ρ ⎦ ,
ln(ρ) +
⎭
ρ⎩
ρ 4
i=1

after imposing A = ρ/ 2 to get rid of ln(W j (t)), and the constraint (13) for every i =
1, . . . , p − 1. Using the expression of the cost c j (t) after replacing A = ρ/ 2, (49), and (50)
together with the constraint (13) in the first equation of (9) follows that the optimal wealth
of the player j, j = 1, 2 is
⎡⎛
⎞
⎤
p−1
p−1
1
1
W j (t) = W 1 (0) exp ⎣⎝
ξi (μi − μ p ) + μ p − ρ ⎠ t +
ξi σi (Bi (t) − Bi (0))⎦.
4
2
i=1

i=1

The transversality condition in this case is
# !
$
"
1
−ρt
1
2
lim e
ln(W (t)) + ln(W (t)) + B
E
t→+∞
A






e−ρt
1
2
= lim
E ln(W (t)) + E ln(W (t))
t→+∞ A

(53)

+ lim e−ρt B = 0,
t→+∞

which holds by applying the same arguments of Proposition 3.
Remark 3 One can easily observe that the logarithmic utility case could be seen as the limit
of the power utility when the constant relative risk aversion tends to 1.

7 Extension to the finite-horizon case
In this section, we consider the finite-horizon formulation of the problem (8), and, as before,
we treat both the non-cooperative and cooperative cases. In particular, we report only the
values of the optimal controls in both scenarios because their computation is very similar to
the one made in Proposition 1 and Proposition 2.
Consider two players, j = 1, 2, that invest in the market and share the same number of
investments. Both players aim at solving the following finite-horizon problem
j

max

j j
j
c j ,s1 ,s2 ,...,s p−1

⎡

:= E ⎣

 T

j

j

J (W j , t, c j , s1 , s2 , . . . , s p−1 )
e−ρs

t

2

⎤
U j (c1 (s), c2 (s))ds + S(W j (T ), T )⎦ ,

(54)

j=1

subject to the same constraints as in (9).

7.1 The non-cooperative case
(1 ∈ C 2,1 (twice differentiable with respect to W 1 (·) and once with respect
Denoting by V
to t, with continuous derivatives) the value function associated to the problem (54) for the

123

Annals of Operations Research

(1 (W 1 (t), t) solves the following
player 1, the triple (W 1 (t), c1 (t), si1 (t)) is its solution if V
HJB system:

⎞
⎛
⎧
 p−1
⎪
 1
⎪
1
1
⎪
(
(1 + e−ρt U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t))+
⎝
Dt V1 + max
si (t)(μi − μ p ) + μ p W (t) − c (t)⎠ DW 1 V
⎪
⎪
⎪
{c1 ,si1 }
⎪
i=1
⎨

p−1
(55)
1
⎪
1
2
2
1
2 2 (
⎪
=
0,
(s
(t))
(σ
)
(W
(t))
D
V
i
1
⎪
1
i
W
⎪
2
⎪
⎪
i=1
⎪
⎩
(1 (W 1 (T ), T ) = S(W 1 (T ), T ),
V

(1 , while
(1 and D 2 1 V
( are defined as in (17), Dt V
(1 is the time derivative of V
where DW 1 V
W 1
S(W 1 (T ), T ) is a specified bequest valuation function. Assuming that U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) is as
in (18) and
(1 (W 1 (t), t) = A1 (t) e−ρt (W 1 (t))1−α1 , A1 (t) ∈ R, α1 > 0, α1 = 1,
V
1 − α1
θ α1
S(W 1 (T ), T ) = 1 e−ρT (W 1 (T ))1−α1 , α1 > 0, α1 = 1, θ1 ∈ (0, 1),
1 − α1

(56)
(57)

(1 (W 1 (T ), T ) = S(W 1 (T ), T ) if and only if A1 (T ) = θ α1 .
we get that V
1
(1 and, recalling that c2 (t) is exogenous
By the first order conditions, the concavity of V
for player 1, follows that the optimal consumption and the investment on the i-th asset of the
player 1 are
)
*
ξ1 /[1 + (ξ1 θ1 − 1)eξ1 (t−T ) ] W 1 (t), if ξ1 > 0,
c (t) =
[1/(θ1 + T − t)]W 1 (t),
if ξ1 = 0,
−
μ
μ
i
p
si1 (t) =
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
α1 (σi )2
1

where ξ1 = A1 as defined in (23) and si1 is such that 0 ≤ si1 < ξi − si2 for every i =
1, . . . , p − 1. For the player 2 in the non-cooperative scenario hold similar results to the ones
above, i.e., for θ2 ∈ (0, 1),
)

*
ξ2 /[1 + (ξ2 θ2 − 1)eξ2 (t−T ) ] W 2 (t), if ξ2 > 0,
c (t) =
[1/(θ2 + T − t)]W 2 (t),
if ξ2 = 0,
−
μ
μ
i
p
si2 (t) =
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
α2 (σi )2
2

where ξ2 is similar to A1 (unless replacing α1 with α2 ), si2 is such that 0 ≤ si2 < ξi − si1 for
every i = 1, . . . , p − 1.

7.2 The cooperative case
( ∈ C 2,1 the value function associated with the problem (54), the triple
Denoting by V
j
((W 1 (t), W 2 (t), t) solves the follow(W j (t), c j (t), si (t)) for j = 1, 2 is its solution if V
ing HJB system:

123

Annals of Operations Research

⎧
 2  p−1

 j
⎪
⎪
j
j
( + max
( + e−ρt U1 (c1 (t), c2 (t))+
⎪
(t)(μ
−
μ
)
+
μ
(t)
−
c
(t),
D
V
V
s
W
D
j
t
i
p
p
⎪
W
i
⎪
⎪
{c1 ,c2 ,si1 ,si2 }
⎪
j=1 i=1
⎨

2  p−1
(58)
1
j
2
⎪
(
(si (t))(sik (t))(σi )2 (W j (t))(W k (t))DW
e−ρt U2 (c1 (t), c2 (t))) +
= 0,
⎪
j Wk V
⎪
⎪
2
⎪
⎪
j,k=1 i=1
⎪
⎩
((W 1 (T ), W 2 (T ), T ) = S(W 1 (T ), W 2 (T ), T ),
V

( and D 2 j V
( are defined as in (31), Dt V
( is the time derivative of V
(, while
where DW j V
W
1
2
1
S(W (T ), W (T ), T ) is a specified bequest valuation function. Assuming U1 (c (t), c2 (t)) =
U2 (c1 (t), c2 (t)) as in (32) and


((W 1 (t), W 2 (t), t) = A(t) e−ρt (W 1 (t))1−α + (W 2 (t))1−α , A(t) ∈ R, α > 0, α = 1,
V
1−α

θ α −ρT  1
e
(W (t))1−α + (W 2 (t))1−α , α > 0, α = 1, θ ∈ (0, 1),
S(W 1 (T ), W 2 (T ), T ) =
1−α

(1 (W 1 (T ), W 2 (T ), T ) = S(W 1 (T ), W 2 (T ), T ) if and only if A(T ) = θ α .
we get that V
By the first order conditions, the application of the constraint (13) and the concavity of
(, follows that the optimal consumption and the investment on the i − th asset of the player
V
j, for j = 1, 2, are
⎧+ ,
!
-.
"
β(t−T )
⎨ β/ 1 + βθ
W j (t), if β > 0,
−
1
e
1/α
2
"c j (t) = , ! θ
⎩ 1/ 1/α + T − t W j (t),
if β = 0,
2
j

si (t) =

μi − μ p
, i = 1, . . . , p − 1,
α(σi )2

where β = 21/α A, with A as in (38).

8 An illustrative case study: cooperative versus non-cooperative
investment strategies
The dynamic and ever-evolving nature of the cryptocurrency market poses unique challenges
and opportunities for portfolio management. In this case study, we explore the application
of Merton’s portfolio management framework, enhanced with a dynamic game approach, to
the crypto market, considering the inclusion of a risk-free asset as well. By incorporating
game theory principles and considering the strategic interactions among market participants,
we aim to gain insights into optimal investment strategies, risk management, and the impact
of a risk-free asset in this dynamic and volatile ecosystem. We also use this case study to
compare cooperative vs non-cooperative portfolio strategies. We consider a portfolio of five
different assets. Data have been collected over the period November 5, 2022–November 5,
2023 from Yahoo Finance. The five different assets considered in our experiment are:
• Fidelity Crypto Industry and Digital Payments ETF (FDIG)
• Bitwise Crypto Industry Innovators ETF (BITQ)
• Bitwise 10 Crypto Index Fund (BITW)
• CMC Crypto 200 Index by Solacti (CMC200)
• Treasury Yield 30 Years (TYX)

123

Annals of Operations Research

Fig. 1 Daily opening prices temporal evolution

Figure 1 shows the evolution over time of the opening prices of the above assets.
In order to estimate the drift term μi and the volatility σi , we notice that if we discretise
( t = 1 corresponds to one day) the stochastic differential equation of Pi (t) (4), we get
that:
Pi (t + 1) − Pi (t)
= μi + σi
Pi (t)

Bi (t).

Now, taking the expectation of both sides of (59), it follows that


Pi (t + 1) − Pi (t)
E
= μi .
Pi (t)
At the same time, if we take the variance of both sides, we get

123

(59)

(60)

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Estimated μi and σi2
Asset

μi

σi2

Fidelity crypto industry and digital payments ETF (FDIG)

μ1 = 0.0015

σ12 = 0.0014

Bitwise crypto industry innovators ETF (BITQ)

μ2 = 0.0019

σ22 = 0.0018

Bitwise 10 crypto index fund (BITW)

μ3 = 0.0026

σ32 = 0.0016

CMC crypto 200 index by solacti (CMC200)

μ4 = 0.0020

σ42 = 0.0009

Treasury yield 30 years (TYX)

μ5 = 0.0006

σ52 = 0.0002

Table 2 Investment strategies for both players
Asset

Player 1

Player 2

Asset volume

Fidelity crypto industry and digital payments ETF (FDIG)

s1 = 0.1428

s1 = 0.0142

0.1471

Bitwise crypto industry innovators ETF (BITQ)

s2 = 0.1604

s2 = 0.0160

0.1765
0.3055

Bitwise 10 crypto index fund (BITW)

s3 = 0.2777

s3 = 0.0277

CMC crypto 200 index by solacti (CMC200)

s4 = 0.3456

s4 = 0.0345

0.3802

Treasury yield 30 years (TYX)

s5 = 0.0735

s5 = 0.9076

0.9907


V ar

Pi (t + 1) − Pi (t)
Pi (t)


= σi2 .

(61)

Equations (60) and (61) therefore allow to determine the estimation of the drift and the
volatility parameters for all different assets.
The results are presented in Table 1. As observed from Fig. 1, these results confirm that
investments in TYX are less risky than those in the other assets. For this illustrative example,
we consider TYX as a risk-free asset. Moreover, let us assume that only a fixed volume ξi of
each asset is available on the financial markets, for instance, here, we suppose ξ1 = 0.1471,
ξ2 = 0.1765, ξ3 = 0.3055, ξ4 = 0.3802, and ξ5 = 0.9907 millions of dollars. The total
volume is, therefore, 2 millions of dollars.
In this financial scenario there are two investors with two different risk aversion parameters,
α1 = 4.5 and α2 = 45 as we are considering the case of power utility. Let us notice that the
second player has a much higher risk aversion than the first one, so we expect the second
player to be more in favour of risk-free investments. We also consider a non-cooperative
scenario in which each decision maker j = 1, 2, tries to invest in each risky asset an amount
j
si equal to (μi − μ p )/α j (σi )2 accordingly to the strategic plan illustrated in Table 2.
This plan clearly shows that both optimal strategies cannot be implemented in the noncooperative scenario. For instance, the adoption of the optimal strategy from both players
would require a volume of the first asset FDIG of 0.1571 million dollars, which is above the
current one available on the financial markets. Therefore, in the non-cooperative scenario,
one of the two players will have to adopt a sub-optimal strategy. In the cooperative case,
instead, the two players share information about the risk and make their own decisions using
the same risk aversion parameter. In this case, both players have the chance to put their
optimal strategies in place.

123

Annals of Operations Research

9 Managerial implications
The traditional Merton’s model has been widely used for dynamic portfolio management, providing valuable insights into optimal investment strategies and risk management.
Advancements in the field have led to the development of new formulations that incorporate
different approaches, such as multiobjective or dynamic game approaches. A multiobjective
approach in portfolio management aims to optimize investment portfolios considering multiple conflicting objectives, such as maximizing return, minimizing risk, and ensuring liquidity.
The goal is to identify a set of efficient portfolios that represent different trade-offs between
these objectives. A multi-agent framework, instead, focuses on simulating the behaviour and
interactions of autonomous agents, such as individual investors or fund managers, within the
portfolio management ecosystem. The objective is to understand how the collective actions
of these agents impact the overall market dynamics and portfolio performance.
By integrating the dynamic game philosophy into Merton’s model, managers gain a more
comprehensive understanding of the complex interactions and strategic behaviours within
the market. This enables them to make more informed and proactive investment decisions,
considering the dynamic nature of the financial landscape. The dynamic game formulation
allows for a better assessment and management of risks associated with portfolio management. Managers can analyze the impact of various risk factors and market dynamics on their
investment strategies. This understanding enables them to implement more effective risk
mitigation measures and hedging strategies, improving portfolio performance and reducing
exposure to financial uncertainties.
A dynamic game approach also empowers managers to adapt their investment strategies
in response to changing market conditions and the actions of other market participants.
The formulation recognizes that investment decisions should not be made in isolation (noncooperative strategies) but rather as part of a dynamic ecosystem (cooperative strategies).
Managers can adjust their portfolios based on the observed behaviours of other investors,
anticipating their moves and optimizing their own strategies accordingly.
This new approach can also provide firms with a competitive advantage. By leveraging
insights gained from the dynamic interactions and strategic behaviours of market participants, managers can identify investment opportunities that may not be apparent through
traditional approaches. This can lead to superior portfolio performance, increased profitability, and a strengthened market position. The dynamic game formulation emphasizes the
long-term value-creation potential of dynamic portfolio management. By considering the
strategic interactions among investors and incorporating forward-looking, time-dependent
information, managers can pursue investment strategies that aim to generate sustainable and
consistent returns over time. This approach aligns with the goal of creating long-term value
for stakeholders and maximizing shareholder wealth.

10 Conclusion
Starting from the seminal paper by Merton (1969), we have formulated a dynamic game in
which two players compete in the same financial market to invest in available p assets. The
adoption of a new formulation of Merton’s model using a dynamic game-based approach
offers significant managerial benefits. It enhances decision-making, improves risk management, enables adaptive strategies, provides a competitive advantage, and fosters long-term
value creation. By embracing this innovative approach, managers can navigate the complexi-

123

Annals of Operations Research

ties of the financial markets more effectively, leading to enhanced portfolio performance and,
ultimately, organizational success. To simplify the presentation we have supposed to consider
p − 1 risky assets and only one risk-free asset. We have discussed both the infinite and the
finite-horizon cases under cooperative and non-cooperative strategies. By assuming a CRRA
utility function, we determine the closed-form solution and the optimal time-dependent portfolio allocation among different assets. By comparing the optimal strategies of the cooperative
case with those of the non-cooperative case, one can conclude that the optimal scenario can
be attained only if a cooperative strategy is put in place. Of course, these results are based on
specific model assumptions that allow us to determine a closed-form solution. However, a
real-world situation involves more complicated factors, such as discrete amounts of assets to
hold, discrete quantities of trades, transaction costs, non-stationary and correlated processes
of multiple assets, uncertain risk-free rate, consumption constraints, arbitrary risk aversion,
and so on. In conclusion, the model sheds light on the optimal interaction between different
financial players. Future directions include the extension of the dynamic game approach to
different utility functions as well as the use of different stochastic processes for risky assets.
Acknowledgements R. Maggistro is a member of the INdAM-GNAMPA group.

Declaration
Conflict of interest The authors declare no Conflict of interest.

References
Aouni, B., Ben Abdelaziz, F., & La Torre, D. (2012). The stochastic goal programming model: Theory and
application. Journal of Multi-Criteria Analysis, 19, 185–200.
Aouni, B., Colapinto, C., & La Torre, D. (2014). Financial portfolio management through the goal programming
model: Current state-of-the-art. European Journal of Operational Research, 234, 536–545.
Benson, H. P. (1985). Multiple objective linear programming with parametric criteria coefficients. Management
Science, 31(11), 461–474.
Ben Abdelaziz, F., & La Torre, D. (2021). Robust generalized Merton-type financial portfolio models with
generalized utility. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04051-x
Ben Abdelaziz, F., & Masri, H. (2005). Stochastic programming with fuzzy linear partial information on
probability distribution. European Journal of Operational Research, 162, 619–629.
Ben Abdelaziz, F., Colapinto, C., La Torre, D., & Liuzzi, D. (2020). A stochastic dynamic multiobjective
model for sustainable decision making. Annals of Operations Research, 293, 539–556.
Ben Abdelaziz, F., Lang, P., & Nadeau, R. (1999). Dominance and efficiency in multicriteria decision under
uncertainty. Theory and Decision, 47(3), 191–211.
Chang, F. R. (2004). Stochastic optimization in continuous time. Cambridge University Press.
Hamacher, H. W., Pedersen, C. R., & Ruzika, S. (2007). Introduction to stochastic control. Rinehart and
Winston: Holt.
Karatzas, I., & Žitković, G. (2003). Optimal consumption from investment and random endowment in incomplete semimartingale markets. The Annals of Probability, 31(4), 1821–1858.
Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J. P., Sethi, S. P., & Shreve, S. E. (1986). Explicit solution of a general consumption/investment problem. Mathematics of Operations Research, 11(2), 261–294.
Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J. P., & Shreve, S. E. (1987). Optimal portfolio and consumption decisions for a small
investor on a finite horizon. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 25(6), 1557–1586.
Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J. P., & Shreve, S. E. (1990). Existence and uniqueness of multi-agent equilibrium in a
stochastic, dynamic consumption/investment model. Mathematics of Operations Research, 15, 80–128.
Kogan, K., & Tapiero, C. S. (2018). Merton’s financial multi-agent consumption. Risk and Decision Analysis,
7, 107–117.
Lacker, D., & Soret, A. (2020). Many-player games of optimal consumption and investment under relative
performance criteria. Mathematics and Financial Economics, 14, 263–281.

123

Annals of Operations Research
La Torre, D., & Mendivil, F. (2018). Portfolio optimization under partial uncertainty and incomplete information: A probability multimeasure-based approach. Annals of Operations Research, 267, 267–279.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7, 77–91.
Merton, R. C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247–257.
Merton, R. C. (1971). Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model. Journal of
Economic Theory, 3(4), 373–413.
Merton, R. C. (1987). A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information. Journal of
Finance, 42(3), 483–510.
Sethi, S., & Taksar, M. (1992). Infinite-horizon investment consumption model with a nonterminal bankruptcy.
Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 74(2), 333–346.
Tapiero, C. S. (2015). The financial CCAPM and economic inequalities. Quantitative Finance, 15(3), 521–534.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable
law.

123

